SOURCE URL: https://www.bis.gov.in/hallmarking-overview/?lang=en
TITLE: Hallmarking overview - Bureau of Indian Standards

Hallmarking Regulation 2018 Regulation Notification Amendment 27 October 2021 Amendment 04 March 2022 Amendment 03 March 2023 Amendment 31 March 2023

Mandatory Hallmarking Order Order Amendment dt 9th October 2020 Amendment dt 1st June 2021 Quality Control Orders  23  June 2021 Exemptions in QCO(Guidelines) Amendment dt 04 April 2022 Amendment 03 March 2023 Amendment 31 March 2023 Amendment 06 September 2023 Amendment 05 November 2024 Amendment 31 July 2025 Amendment 02 March 2026 Amendment 28 April 2026. Amendment 03 August 2026. Phase wise coverage of districts

Quality Control Orders  23  June 2021

Jewellers Registration Scheme Guidelines for Jewellers List of Licensed Jewellers Procedure to apply for Jeweller Registration

Procedure to apply for Jeweller Registration

Hallmarking centre Guidelines for AHCs List of Hallmarking Centre Generic Quality Manual List of Cancelled/Expired/Suspended AHCs

Gold refinery Guidelines for Refinery/Mint Scheme of Testing (STI) Marking Fee List of refineries granted licence

Hallmarking is the accurate determination and official recording of the proportionate content of precious metal in precious metal articles. Hallmarks are thus official marks used in many countries as a guarantee of purity or fineness of precious metal articles. The principle objectives of the Hallmarking Scheme are to protect the public against adulteration and to obligate manufacturers to maintain legal standards of fineness. In India, at present two precious metals namely gold and silver have been brought under the purview of Hallmarking.

Procedure For Obtaining Registration by Jeweller for Sale of Hallmarked Jeweller / Artefacrs

Any jeweller willing to obtain certificate of registration for selling Hallmarked Gold and Silver Jewellery/artefacts shall apply online in the BIS portal; www.manakonline.in . The certificate of registration is granted instantly to the jeweller without the need to upload any document or pay any fees for the same. The certificate of registration stands valid for lifetime..

Procedure to apply for Jeweller Registration (size – 2.5 MB)

Procedure for Recognition of Assaying and Hallmarking Center

Indian Standard “IS 15820:2009 General Requirements for Establishment and Operation of Assaying and Hallmarking Centres” is the basis for recognition of Assaying and Hallmarking Centres. A centre desirous of obtaining recognition, after setting up of the Centre shall apply on the prescribed application form to BIS along with their Quality Manual, developed on the basis of Generic Quality Manual.

Guidelines for Recognition of Assaying & Hallmarking Centres

Refineries already in the business of gold refining for the last one year and possessing accreditation from London Bullion Market Association (LBMA) or National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) accreditation of their laboratories may apply for obtaining BIS license for marking the Standard Bars produced by them in accordance with IS 1417: 2016 (for 995 and 999 fineness only).

List of Jewellers Qualifying to act as CPTC

A & H Centres Qualifying to act as CPTC

Expression of Interest from BIS RegisteredJewellers/Refineries for setting up of Collection and Purity Testing Centre under the Gold Monetization Scheme

1) Check testing of Hallmarked/Unhallmarked articles by Consumer:

Consumer can get its jewellery/sample tested from any of the BIS Recognized Assaying & Hallmarking Centre. The Assaying and Hallmarking Centres undertake the testing of Jewellery/Samples of common consumers on priority on chargeable basis. The Assaying and Hallmarking centre is required to issue Assay Report giving proper identifications as marked on article.

Consumer can get its jewellery/sample tested from any of the BIS Recognized Assaying & Hallmarking Centre. The Assaying and Hallmarking Centres undertake the testing of Jewellery/Samples of common consumers on priority on chargeable basis. The Assaying and Hallmarking centre is required to issue Assay Report giving proper identifications as marked on article.

Hallmarking is the accurate determination and official recording of the proportionate content of precious metal in precious metal articles.

2. What are the objectives behind instituting Hallmarking Scheme?

To protect consumer against victimization due to irregular gold or silver quality, and to develop India as a leading gold market centre in the World and to develop export competitiveness.

Contact at the following address for further Enquiry :

Last Updated on April 23, 2026